Al jazer senior political analyst Marwan
bishara is live with us here Marwan
let's break down what's happened and
putting it into context on November the
16th
2023 34 un experts referred to what they
called crimes committed today partly due
to continued
impunity does the provisional icj rule
bring an end to this era of impunity
that the experts are talking about well
theoretically speaking yes uh in
principle yes uh whether Israel will uh
will abide by it remains to be seen it
doesn't seem to me that the Israeli
leaders in particular but also the
Israeli Elite in general the political
Elite and the military brass will be
taking a lot of this on board for the
simple reason they called it heg schme
didn't they the benir benav did I tell
you something I think a lot of these
Israeli leaders when they were uttering
these things and we were like we were
you know rolling our eyes what the hell
are they doing they're giving us IM
ammunition that they're actually
complicit in in
genocide but they're used to this kind
of rhetoric that's what that's how they
speak in Israel there's a certain degree
of racism and
dehumanization and populism among the
political Elite but also in the society
after 56 years of occupation they didn't
even notice
that they're being so racist about it
all right since we're talking about
rhetoric let's listen in to what the
court said in announcing the adoption of
these provisional
measures on 9 October 2023 Mr yav Galant
defense minister of Israel announced
that he had ordered a Complete Siege of
Gaza City and there then that there
would be no electricity no food no fuel
and that everything was closed on 12
October 2023 Mr Isaac Herzog president
of Israel stated referring to Gaza I
quote we are working operating
militarily according to rules of
international law unequivocally it is an
entire nation out there that is
responsible it is not true this rhetoric
about civilians not aware not involved
it is absolutely not true the court
notes that the military operation being
conducted by Israel following the attack
of 7 October 2023 has resulted in a
large number of deaths and injuries as
well as massive destruction of homes the
forcible displacement of the vast
majority of the population and extensive
damage to civilian infrastructure in the
Court's view the aforementioned facts
and circumstances are sufficient to
conclude that at least some of the
rights claimed by South Africa and for
which it is seeking protection are
plausible this is the case with respect
to the right of Palestinians in Gaza to
be protected from acts of
genocide now Maran listening to what was
said there of course this is not the
final finding on whether or not genocide
occurred but the president of the Court
went through what's happening to
civilians what Israeli officials have
been saying and basically said that
South Africa's case genocide case is
plausible right oh yeah I
mean this is a landmark ruling
uh simply because of the the arguments
that was stated for 36
minutes which is almost identical to the
South African arguments which is also
almost identical to what the
Palestinians have been saying for over
four months basically that Israel is not
only genocidal in intent it's genocidal
in practice and the Palestinian people
are in danger of continued genocide but
the what what the what the what the
president of the Court said that they
have been going through and that they
will be going through in the future of
more of the same unless Israel takes a
number of steps that it must take that's
why this is a very important uh ruling
Israel today is on
trial officially for genocide now what
you've just said though when you listen
to what
very significant Western world leaders
have been saying you do feel there is a
very obvious gap between where the icj
is and where some of the world powers
are let's listen into what John Kirby
had to say on January the
4th we find this submission meritless
counterproductive and completely without
any basis in fact
whatsoever did we just basically hear
the president of the world Court refute
that statement that it's counter
meritless and completely without any
basis in fact that's not the impression
you get from the icj if you remember
back back then we said what Kirby
himself was saying was
meritless lacking in diplomacy and
lacking in base it was baseless what he
was saying what Kirby was saying and as
you said the the court of the land the
world's Court have proved everything
Kirby have been saying not just these
three words everything Kirby has been
saying in
justifying Israel's genocide the past
three months were wrong and that's why I
think this type of delusion because
American Biden Administration has proven
to be delusional when it comes to what
Israel has been doing and its attempt at
shielding Israel diplomatically has also
proven to be counterproductive now now
that the world Court have came out with
its ruling the United States and other
Western backers of Israel's
genocide must cease and desist must this
is what some international human rights
groups have been calling for like Human
Rights Watch in a statement of November
the 6th of been warning that and it went
actually mentioned the US the UK Canada
and Germany might be end up being
complicit in abuses right now we're
we're seeing this movement toward that
in the
icj um it it contrasts also does it not
Maran with the rhetoric we heard from
Western leaders during the Ukraine war
let's turn back a year ago and listen
into what some of those leaders were
saying Russian forces also open fire on
10 civilians uh who were waiting in line
for
bread these incidents join a long list
of attacks on civilian not military
locations across Ukraine including
apartment buildings public squares and
last week a maternity hospital in marap
pole uh I doubt that any of us who saw
those images will ever forget them
yesterday President Biden said that in
his opinion war crimes have been
committed in
Ukraine personally I agree yesterday we
saw again Russia's targeted attacks
against civilian
infrastructure and this is marking a new
chapter in an already very cruel War the
international order is very clear these
are war crimes targeted attacks on
civilian infrastructure with a clear aim
to cut off men women children of water
electricity and heating with the winter
coming these are acts of pure
Terror it's amazing that the some of the
the same language was used in those
statements talking about targeting
civilian infrastructure water
electricity being cut from me women and
children were some of the same
references that the president of the icj
explained in why they've come to their
position and yet it took South Africa
Marwan how significant is that not a
major Western power that talks about
human rights it took a non-western power
to bring this case and notice these
referen to the icj well directly to your
question I think today in the world we
live in it's South Africa that's the
champion of international human rights
and humanitarian law not the self-
declared Western powers that are uh the
the champions of of the humanitarian in
our world but back I mean you know back
then we laughed and I'm still laughing
now I mean you can't make this stuff up
you cannot make this stuff up the
hypocrisy the hypocrisy the hypocrisy of
Western leaders especially vanan I mean
and the Biden Administration there's two
things here and we need to differentiate
between them there's the hypocrisy and
there's the double
standard the hypocrisy is because the
Europeans and especially the EU in
general and the
US has been saying that they and their
values are Universal values and
everything about their position on the
question of Gaza proves to be utterly
hyp hypocritical and the second is the
double standard they say something about
the Ukraine because Russia is an enemy
they say something else about Gaza
because Israel is an ally that's the
definition of double standard so it is
laughable laughable how the EU leaders
and the US leaders have taken the
position both hypocritical and double
standard when it comes the question of
Gaza and now it caught up with them
because the world court has proven them
to be hypocritical all right thanks so
much Maran bashara for coming in